[THEME MUSIC]
>> Have you noticed that there's
this strong push in modern
society for us to be rational?
Well, what if logic and
rationale are not as foolproof
as they seem?
Welcome back to "Limitless."
Today we're talking
about the irrational.
And Friedrich
Nietzsche even said
the irrationality of
a thing is no argument
against its existence;
rather, a condition of it.
So what I'd like to do
today is to break you
outside of your thought box,
outside of your comfort zone--
that logical, practical
bubble that we typically
feel comfortable in.
Today I'd like to bring
you into something
a little bit more irrational--
an Irrational Evolution.
So what is truth--
that thing that we all
seem to be striving for,
that thing that we
believe will actually
solve some of these
ecological and societal issues
that we face?
The ancient Greeks
believed what is memorable
and what is passed down--
that is truth.
Plato said what abides in
the world of perfect forms
is truth.
Then you go to
Asia, in the east.
There are many beliefs of a
more holistic form of truth,
the balance of nature.
What about the Lakota
Native American tribe?
They believe that
the clashing of ideas
brings forth the spark
of truth, meaning
that what truth is
is something that
lies within the social context.
It's in between the
lines, a little bit
more elusive than
we may believe.
So these are all different
cultures with different ideas
of what truth really is.
So how do we get there?
How do we arrive, or at least
move in the direction of truth?
Well, many people
today are using logic.
Well, let's take
a look at logic.
Let's just say you have a
sphere, and inside this sphere,
you have what you
know that you know.
Right outside the sphere is what
you know that you don't know.
So all of this-- what you know
you know and what you know you
don't know--
will inform your logic.
But all that empty
space around it--
the things that you're not even
aware of that you don't know--
this is where logic breaks down.
I'll give you an example.
Two children, side by side.
Both of them have
puzzles, 500 pieces each.
Each of them-- both
children-- have constructed
their puzzles--
499 pieces of them--
and they have one piece
left, but it won't fit.
It makes no sense to them.
Why doesn't this one piece fit?
Neither of them understand
that the other child
sitting right next to them has
the solution to their problem.
The solution is as close as
this other child is to them.
All they have to do is hand
each other their piece,
problem solved.
But they're spending more time
on figuring out this one piece
than they took on
the entire puzzle.
This is an example of
inferior logic in action.
So the real question is,
what is the other vehicle?
If logic is not the only
way to arrive at truth,
what is this other vehicle?
Myself and many other people
believe that intuition
must come into play.
Well, let's hear what
Albert Einstein has
to say about intuition.
"The intuitive mind
is a sacred gift,
and the rational mind
is a faithful servant.
We have created a society
that honors the servant,
and has forgotten the gift."
Isn't this true?
Well, this is
Albert Einstein, one
of the most celebrated
minds in all of science,
saying that the intuitive
mind is the superior one.
So let's take a look at the
difference between things
that you sense through your
sense organs and things
that you intuit using
this abstract thing called
intuition.
Sensing is practical,
down to earth,
concrete, focused on
the present and past,
detail-oriented,
and quite literal.
But intuition, on
the other hand,
is visionary, future-oriented,
imaginative, conceptual,
abstract, and
focused on meanings,
and it's also read
between the lines.
So it's not this objective truth
that we can all agree upon,
but this subjective thing--
this thing that emerges
from within, our intuition--
is the missing piece
of the puzzle--
how to arrive at a
full picture of truth.
So to me, using our intuition
and using the rational mind--
this is a holistic way to
move forward as a species.
So let's put this into
a cultural context.
In society, we really
do respect science.
In fact, there's actually
two legs of physics.
One is modern physics.
The other is quantum physics.
Now, when you take
a look at these two,
they behave very differently.
And we've talked
about quantum physics
before and how oddly or
irrational quantum physics
seems to behave.
It seems like modern
physics should
be very straightforward, very
understandable, very concrete
and practical.
But there's certain
things that still boggle
the mind in modern physics.
Take, for instance,
time dilation.
If you have two
identical clocks,
you place one on the
Earth and one on a plane,
this plane goes
600 miles an hour,
and it races around for hours
in the air as fast as it can go,
and then it lands.
Once you take a look
at those two clocks,
the one that was moving in the
plane is nanoseconds younger.
Now, this isn't some
trick or effect of motion.
Physics is saying that all
frames of reference are just
as valid for things that
are in uniform motion,
but if these things are
not in uniform motion,
then that frame of reference
cannot keep time the same way
as the other.
This is interesting, because
this is saying that time is not
some solid, structural thing.
It's based on our perspective.
It's based on our
frame of reference.
That's how elusive time is.
But time, in modern
physics, still
does move in a very linear
and logical fashion.
This is not how
quantum physics works--
the whole other leg of physics.
Quantum physics seems
far more irrational.
Now, let's take a look at what
Stuart Hameroff, of a quantum
theorist, has to say on
"The Real What the Bleep"
with Regina Meredith.
>> Well, first of all, to
explain quantum mechanics
or quantum theory
in a general sense,
our world is really described
by two sets of laws.
You might only say
there are two worlds.
There's the classical,
everyday world
where things are definite,
and there's the quantum world
that's small scale--
although exactly how
small is unclear--
where things are
quite indefinite,
and things can be in two or
more places at the same time,
separated from themselves.
Things can be interconnected
over great distances,
and seemingly together even
when they're separated.
And things can condense
into one object.
These are all-- and
time doesn't flow.
These are all characteristics
of the quantum world.
And the classical world,
as I said, is definite.
I think, in a very general
sense, the subconscious--
our dreamworld, the kind
of situation you describe--
relates to the quantum world,
and consciousness is actually
the transition
between that quantum
world and the classical world.
So it's kind of a
boundary between--
consciousness exists on the
boundary between the quantum
world and the classical world.
>> The quantum realm boggles
the mind, not quite rational.
So this is why focusing on
science is very crucial.
But also, understanding
the limitations
of our mind, the limitations
of what we can conceive of,
is very crucial.
Because really, what
science is is experiments
that are set up in
a unique way which
acts as a lens to let data
through certain constraints.
So all experiments are lenses
for data to come through.
But what happens on the
other end of that lens, when
somebody observes
data coming through
a scientific experiment?
What then happens?
The data doesn't just
sit there doing nothing.
No.
We draw meaning and
philosophy from the data.
That's the next part of it.
But the interesting
thing is now this
is no longer the domain of
the scientist within us.
It's the philosopher
within us that
draws a meaning from the
experiences that we have.
Our perceptions have a huge
impact on who and what we are
and how much potential we
can bring to the moment.
So this isn't a light matter.
Let's take it to a cellular
biologist named Bruce Lipton
as he talks about just that.
This episode is called "Bruce
Lipton On 'The Biology Of
Belief.'"
>> And this is what the new
biology is taking us back
to-- is that before we
saw ourselves as victims.
If there was something wrong,
we'd go to the outside.
We'd look for a
drug or a chemical
to correct the
functioning of the system.
Now, with the new
biology, we're recognizing
that we can adjust
our own chemistry,
but we have to do it through
our consciousness and our issues
of our perceptions of
how we see the world.
And why that's
really freeing up is
that think about it
this way-- it's easier
to change your perceptions than
it is to change your genes.
And that when we
recognize that perceptions
run the show, when we start
emphasizing our beliefs
and our psychology
behind our health,
that is a
self-empowering process.
>> I really like Bruce
Lipton, and I love his book,
"The Biology of Belief."
One of the best things
this book showed to me
is that our perceptions not only
change us on a chemical level,
on a neurological level, but
they also don't sit idly by.
They're always acting
upon our decision-making.
In a sense, you
could say they're
always steering the ship,
whether we're awake or asleep.
And some people believe
that our entire species
is largely asleep, so we are
being driven, in this way,
by our beliefs--
logical or not.
I want to give you
an example of this.
I'm going to show you
an optical illusion.
And I'll explain the
optical illusion of it,
but it will still work.
You'll notice that this image
has a lot of unique colors
to it.
It kind of looks like a
negative of a photograph.
There's a dot in the center.
I want you to focus on that dot.
Stare directly at that
dot, and only the dot.
Your peripheral vision is going
to be able to see the rest
of the image-- all the
colors, all the shapes--
so you might be able to make
out a little bit of what
this image is.
But as you're staring at
it, your eyes, right now,
are adjusting to
the color gradient.
And what I'm going to
do is change the image.
The image is really only
going to change in color,
but as it changes, I want you
to keep your eyes on that dot.
Don't move them from the dot.
And if you do this
correctly, you'll
see exactly what I'm getting at.
So keep staring at the
dot, and this image
is going to change now.
Now, you might notice, as
you're staring at the dot,
that there's a beautiful
color image that has emerged.
But now adjust your eyes.
Notice that there is no color.
It's a black and white image.
Very interesting that your
eyes put the right colors
in the right places.
You saw a color image when
there was no color present.
There is a scientific
explanation for this.
Again, it's the
McCollough effect.
But the fact is you
were seeing color
when no color was present.
Your mind was filling
in the blanks.
And we do this all the time,
in many different scenarios.
I could show you 100
different optical illusions
to drive home this
point, but I think
that's enough to show you
that we fill in the blanks
when we don't
understand something.
When our logic falls
short and becomes
inferior to a superior
form of logic that is true,
we still seem to stick
with our inferior logic.
We fill in those blanks.
Things that are
completely irrational
will still fit into the box--
the thought box-- that
we typically live within.
Am I making the point?
The way you perceive the world
will tell you what is possible
and what is not possible.
So I want you to remember
that in this life,
in this path towards unlocking
our hidden potential,
we really want to try a lot.
We want to challenge our
assumptions and our beliefs.
We want to break out
of that thought box.
I like what Dr. Henry
Link said about this.
He says, "We generate
fears while we sit,
and we overcome them by action."
So this is exactly what
I'm asking you to do.
Don't just sit around.
Challenge your perceptions.
Challenge your beliefs.
And this might truly help you.
So moving forward
from this point, what
happens after we
have a philosophy,
we have enough meaning
to move forward?
We experienced something,
we gathered the data,
and then we extrapolated
some kind of meaning.
Then what?
Well, philosophies don't
just sit idly by either.
They want to act.
They want to commit
to something.
And that process
of commitment is
what I call the religious
aspect of consciousness.
Now, that trips people
up sometimes-- the word
"religious."
Here is the distinction.
Religion is an aspect
of consciousness,
whereas a religious
institution are what humans,
and rather, groups of
humans do with that aspect
of consciousness.
So there really is some
form of a connection,
but not a real connection
between religious institutions
and the religious aspect,
or the committing aspect
of consciousness.
If you take a look
at a marriage,
you have three parties.
Party 1 is marrying party
2, and the third party
is the witness--
the church.
They're the ones
who, in a sense,
take care of the contract.
The two other
parties make the vow.
And in some cultures,
they'll take a ribbon
and wrap it around the
hands of the lovers,
showing that these two
parties are becoming one.
Well, this is the root
word for religion.
It's the Latin verb
"religare," to bind.
So that aspect within
our consciousness
that calls us to
commit to something,
not just sit around
and do nothing--
having all these philosophies,
but nothing to do with them.
The religion in us
asks us, it beckons
us to commit to something
that we truly believe in.
So I invite you to take a look
at this episode of "Omega."
It's an interview with Stephen
Levine and Ondrea Levine,
and the episode is
called "Relationship--
A Pathway to Self-Discovery."
>> We wait to be safe to
let go, and therefore,
we never find the great
experience that no state
of mind is preferable
to any other--
to the heart.
Only to our self-image.
To the heart, it's
all just one thing.
It's all just the
flow unfolding.
divine presence.
It's all sacred.
One of the things we learned
from our relationship,
as it expanded and expanded,
more than anything else,
was that love is the only
rational act of a lifetime.
>> Love is the only
How did that phrase hit you?
It struck me very deep.
That which we believe
in and want to commit to
wants to come into the world,
but it needs an act to do it.
And that's where the final
piece of the puzzle comes in--
art.
Art is the way we
bring forth all
of our abstract ideas
and beliefs and concepts,
and bring them into
this concrete moment
that we call the now.
It's an artistic moment.
All the things we say, the way
we say them, the things we do,
the way we dress up
our body, how we eat,
how we talk, how
we sing, the things
we like, the things
we don't like--
all of these things show up
in actions and behaviors.
This is the art of life.
This is the artist in us.
And it's a very
beautiful thing, and it
completes the whole
ecosystem of consciousness.
Now, this is important, because
all ecosystems are holistic.
Like the way the
Asian cultures believe
about truth is holistic,
it's a balancing act.
But if, for some reason,
science, philosophy, religion,
and art are at odds
with one another,
then consciousness and the
cycle of it is not complete,
and the ecosystem will
start to suffer from it.
The scientist may not understand
the artist or the religious,
and vice versa.
Anyway you mish and mash,
those four elements--
they may not
understand one another,
but they complete one another.
They are in balance with one
another in a proper ecosystem.
So I invite you to listen
to Jean Houston's word
in an episode of
"Inspirations with Lisa Garr."
>> Quantum teaches us that
the atom is mostly space.
>> Oh, yes.
>> And for many, many years,
we believed that that was--
that space was nothing.
But now you're
filling that space
with these incredible thoughts
of being able to engage with it
and dance with that space.
Can you talk a little
bit about that?
I think your new book
is about this, yes?
>> Well, the new
one's coming out--
that it is consciousness.
And that once we realize that
we are, as I said, the universe,
we have access to many of its
powers, its capacities, things
that we never
thought we could do,
the manifestation of
creating the future,
you see, ways of turning
possibility waves
into probability waves.
So I've just been teaching
people how to do this,
and it's been quite remarkable
how to create what is called,
in Buddhism, a terma.
And Padmasambhava-- back
in the 8th century--
he's the man who brought
Buddhism to Tibet.
He and his wife began
to plant termas,
called hidden treasures, into
the past, into the future,
in people's minds, in nature.
And so I've been teaching people
how to actually create a terma.
So that's powerful intention--
a powerful intention--
that is not just for your
betterment, but for the world.
>> Thank you so
much, Jean Houston,
for exactly how you said that
and the heart that you brought
to that message,
because it's very true--
there's so much empty space that
is pregnant with possibility.
There's so much room
to bring ourselves,
our own artistic expression,
into every single moment.
And when we do this,
especially with real heart,
then we are planting seeds--
good seeds-- that will grow
into good fruits in the future.
Ralph Waldo Emerson said,
"The creation of 1,000 forests
is in one acorn."
This is how long one seed
that you plant can last.
It will ripple throughout
eternity, generation
after generation.
The seed is small, but
the effect is enormous.
So here's the big
question I need to ask.
What is it going to
take for humanity
to wake up to our actions,
to what we do to the planet,
and to one another?
I believe the answer
is, again, love.
It's the only rational
act of a lifetime.
When all other things
fail, the one bridge
between all of our ideas, all of
our concepts, all the goodness
we wish to bring
into the world--
it's all driven by love.
Love is the most powerful bond.
It is strong, and
it is very decisive.
It has a very strong commitment
to bringing more love
into this world.
But that's the thing--
love does not just arrive here.
It needs somebody,
like you, to bring it.
It needs somebody
like you to spread it.
Plant those seeds, and start
bringing it into this planet,
because it is truly the
only medicine that matters,
and we are in
desperate need of it.
So with that being said,
here's my challenge for you.
I challenge you to do one
thing every single day that's
illogical, outside of your
realm of rationale, pragmatism.
Talk to somebody that you
would normally pass by.
Go to a restaurant that
you would never go to,
and try something there.
Whatever it is,
do it specifically
because it is
illogical, irrational,
to see what it has
in store for you.
And the second part
of this challenge
is to listen for what
intuition might come to us.
So whether you're
looking for your keys
and you can't find
them, whether you're
trying to pick a movie
or a book to read,
do something where you need
to listen to your intuition.
Listen for how it might speak.
And remember that it
might come to you in a way
that you have no clue that
intuition could actually
speak in this way.
So these are your challenges--
do something irrational,
and listen for your intuition.
So thank you guys so
much for joining me
on this special
episode of "Limitless."
I really hope you take
these messages to heart
and employ them and realize
that the way we conceive
of this world may
not be what it seems,
and when you break
free from that,
that is where you will find
your deepest potential.
I'll see you guys
next time around.